This video is brought to you by Nord VPN. Give yourself options online.
Go to Nord vpn.com/biographics.
So you use code biographics of checkout for a massive discounts on the price of
a two year plan, more on them in just a bit
He's perhaps the most, I figure in German history at the moment, Frederick II,
better known as Frederick.
The great ascend to the throne in 1740 PR was a discontinuous
scrap of a state sandwich between far more powerful rivals.
By the time he died in 1786, Berlin's fortunes had been changed forever.
It was under Frederick,
the PRS rose to the status of great European power that the
foundations were laid for its vital future role in unifying Germany.
It was also at the King's court that the idea of an enlightenment ruler was
realized an absolute auto crash who used his power, not for tyranny,
but for tolerance yet,
while it's Frederick's career in war and state building that's remembered today,
there was so much more to crush his greatest king than mere gungho
nationalism.
A man of immense culture.
Frederick transforms the faces of cities like Berlin and Potsdam.
He patronized France's greatest writers provided a safe Harbor for Europe's
atheists and ushered through reforms that shook the continent beloved and
despised an equal measure by his temporaries. This is the story of pressures,
unlikely philosopher king.
Because of the major role it later played in unifying Germany.
Most of us today think of pressure as an important state,
but this wasn't always true. Although I at Frederick,
the great was born on January the 24 or 17, 12.
Nobody would've dreamed of calling pressure a great European power Berlin's
territory was sort of halfway grounds between Amir electorate and a minor state,
her Maite and Frederick's owned colorful phrasing.
When his father Frederick William, the first assumed power in 17, 13,
he was only the second king Prusa had ever had.
Prior to that, it had nearly been a Dutch sheet,
still pressure's motor role didn't stop Frederick William from thinking big,
of course,
military man Frederick William was convinced that his state's future lay in
building up the army and turning his eldest son into a warrior while this
prediction would turn out to be right.
It would also be the cause of all of his sons suffering until the age of seven
Frederick.
That seemed to be great was raised by his mother alongside his sister will
Hellina. It was most unhappy time.
The female court was full of intrigue and back biting young Frederick could
barely understand to cope with the tension in the air.
He and Willhelm retreated together into fantasy worlds,
becoming obsessed with music and literature obsessions that would stay with
Frederick all his life. But if the young boy thought life with mummy was tough.
Wait until he started spending time with dad. When the boy turned seven,
he was yanked away and placed in the care of his tyrannical father.
And trust us, the a tyrannical is probably underselling it a little Frederick.
William was of the old school,
spare the rod and spoil the child mentality.
He took it upon himself to beat his, a feminine music, loving son into shape.
And we mean that literally Frederick was publicly humiliated by his father.
Beaten, bullied told to commit suicide. It was day in, day out,
torment designed do crush the boy's spirit.
He wanted to toughen him up and turn him into a soldier.
Instead it very nearly drove him away in 1730 while serving in the army
Frederick decided to flee pressure. He took along his best friend Han Armon VCA.
Although there are plenty who think that kata was more than just a BFF
throughout his life. Frederick,
the great would show a marked preference from men surrounding himself with
strapping young lads and having his palaces filled with paintings of beautiful
boys. Almost historians would hesitate to definitively call him.
There's plenty of circumstantial evidence from the medallions he had made as
king depicting ancient male lovers to the poem. He wrote declaring the disciple.
John shed a bit of sexy time with Jesus,
nor is this just a modern interpretation Frederick's own father called him a
feminist and a sodomite,
a description enemy propaganda would pick up on and run with. So yeah,
there's a good chance. Frederick.
The great was at least by romantic and probably gay,
which makes what happens to Han Amond.
Vanatta all the more tragic before their escape attempts.
It even got off the ground. The two young men were arrested.
Frederick was told that his father was going to have him executed for desertion
while the old Tyrons eventually showed leniency.
The same couldn't be said of poor on cardiac on November the sixth,
1730 KA was behead.
Frederick William forced his son to watch the execution through a window in the
aftermath. The young man collapsed weeping to the round.
It was a sadistic demonstration of Frederick's helplessness of his father's
brutal hold over him. Luckily his awful dad wouldn't be around for much longer.
The years following VA county's murders or Frederick William tried to force his
son into something resembling a regular life. In 1733,
he was married to Elizabeth, Christine of Brunswick,
Bevin who Frederick described as a sour subspecies of the female
sect and spent most of his life trying to avoid her. One year later,
he earned his stripes on the battlefield facing off against the French army
under an Austrian general.
Yet Frederick kicked back against this unwanted life refusing to be the man,
his father, to old him to be, he adopted a slightly Fay refined personality.
Spent his time reading French literature.
He even became an about non-believer spitting in the eye of his father's strict
Calvinist face yet for all. He tried to differentiate himself from his father.
Something of the old man must rubbed off already.
Frederick was adopting his father's bullying ways towards his young younger
brother, the openly homosexual prince Henry, as well as his last family life.
It was that same old sad story of growing up to become everything you hated
about your own parents. Thankfully though, Frederick William.
I first wouldn't get to see it. The king of PR died on the 31st of May, 1740.
Exactly what Frederick the great felt when he got the news has been lost a time,
but we are guessing it had more than a touch of party. Time to it.
During his coronation journey,
he allowed his attractive young ballet as it alongside him,
openly treating the boy like Royal mistres nor was Frederick.
The only one to feel released by his father's death among the PR and
intellectual class.
There was a strong feeling that Frederick was exactly the sort ruler that they
needed. It was known that the new king was cultured,
a flute player who loved architecture in the arts after the military PPO of
Frederick William,
they had reasoned to hope that Frederick the great would usher in naira peace
and culture as turned out,
those hopes would only be halfway fulfilled along with everything else.
Frederick,
the great had inherited his father's vast and well trained army and fate was
about to hand him the perfect opportunity for using them over in Austria.
The holy room in Ember, Charles, the six was dying at this time.
Austria under the Hapsburg was the premier German speaking power in Europe
later, Hoen wearing Goliath next to PRS scrappy. David,
unfortunately for Habsburg law said only male relatives could inherit the
throne. This was unfortunate because Charles was dying.
Having had only a daughter,
although Charles had spent years trying to convince Europe to recognize Maria
Teresa as his legitimate air.
The other powers were far more interested in carving up her territory with the
whole of Europe, sharpening it swords the moments Charles kicked the bucket.
Frederick realized that he was facing a do or die moment,
right on precious border sat the Habsburg region of Silesia an area so
wealthy. It supplied a quarter of the entire Austrian.
It unfortunately, Silesia also bordered right on Saxony and electorate.
At least as powerful as Prussia Frederick could play things safe.
Be the cultured king.
His subjects wanted him to be and watch Saxony absorb Silesia or he could become
the great military man. His father had dreamed of and take the region himself.
Charles, the sixth died on October the 20th, 1740, less than two months later,
Frederick marched 80,000 troops into Silesia.
It was the start of the war of Austrian succession war that would reshape
central Europe.
It was also the war that would finally earn Frederick the Appalachian. Great.
And you know what else is great. Today's video a Nord VPN. Now more than ever.
It's critical to be able to use the internet safely and securely.
We've talked about the benefits of VPNs before. This is not 1999,
too many people are looking here, internet history, bad actors,
trying to steal your data and personal information.
Corporations tracking your browsing activity and bombarding you with ads who do
needs. Any of that. I'll tell you probably not you.
That's why Nord VPN is so crucial and look,
a common misconception is the VPNs of people who want to play defense,
but they're not just for protecting yourselves.
You'd be amazed at the different streaming options you have when jumping on a
server from Asia or the prices you'll find when shopping from a server in
another country, protect yourself or just play arounds,
buy it for yourself or consider it as an interesting gift for another internet
user in your life. With Nord VPN, you've got lots of options.
And right now you guys can receive a huge discounts on purchases of a two year
per and plus a bonus month for free.
And if you make a purchase and decide the Nord VPN isn't for you,
they offer a 30 day money back guarantee. So that's fantastic. Look,
there's never been a better time to enhance your online experience than with
Nord VPN right now. So head to Nord, vpn.com/biographics or use the code,
biographics a checkout,
or just follow the link in the description below that makes it easy.
And let's get back to Fred.
Considering he's literally called the great Frederick's early attempts at warm
hungering were more Laurel and Hardy than Napoleon Bonna part during the first
major Austrian encounter attack of 1741,
Frederick got so power that he fled the battlefield,
tried to hide and came this close to being captured.
It was only thanks to his generals that the tide was turned and the battle
became a PRUs and victory.
You won't be surprised to hear that this little misadventure was conspicuously
left out of the official narrative,
but even for Frederick to get this far required a massive stroke of luck at the
time, Austria allied with Russia. And there was a real chance.
1741 could have dawned with the Russian bear stomping into pressure and doing
too Berlin. What Yogi bear does do picnic baskets.
It was only by sheer luck that Russia was destabilized by dynastic shenanigans
that kept St Petersburg out of the fight yet,
while Frederick was undeniably lucky at the, a start of the war,
it's what he did with those lucky breaks that made him so impressive.
Although she'd keep trying for almost her entire reign,
Maria therea would never get Silesia back.
The thing was that Frederick was just a master at knowing when to apply pressure
during 1742, he staged an invasion of Moravia,
not because he wanted to conquer it,
but because he knew Maria therea would be too busy, fighting Saxony, Bavaria,
and France to do anything but grants him a peace treaty. Two years later,
when the tide was turning in Austria's favor,
he invaded Bohemia just to stop Maria Theresa from gaining the advantage.
This wasn't great leadership in the Napoleon.
Mold conquering everything in sight with superior ability,
but it was realistic leadership with a targeted goal,
keep Silesia and in real life,
that's usually way more successful than going for broke. On Christmas day, 1745.
Frederick finally reached a long term settlement with Austria in return for
pressure withdraw from the war.
The piece of Dresden basically gave Frederick everything he wanted.
He returns to Berlin that same year was hailed for the first time as Frederick
the crate pressure reddened this war as the new kids, the scrawny young boy,
going up against the biggest kid in the playground,
Austria and making him and over his lunch money.
But the war of Austrian succession would end with Maria Teresa laying the smack
down on most of her opponents, Russia would walk away with its head held high.
Clearly Vienna was no longer the only German speaking great power on the
consonants. Still the Silesia issue would rear its ugly head. Again,
just a decade later this time amid war.
So big Winston Churchill would later call it the real first world war.
But for now we're going to step away from all of the fighting and the killing
and head back to newly confident Berlin.
It's time to see if pressure's new king can handle peace time as well as he
could. War time.
The, in which Frederick rules was the era of enlightened despotism in Europe,
over in Austria, Maria therea was building hospitals,
providing universal education and professionalizing her civil service up in
Russia, Catherine, the great which soon be promoting women's education,
forcing land owners to treat their surfs like actual humans and mapping her
great em empire. But for many,
the greatest of these forward thinking monarchs was Frederick.
The great to be clear. This is forward thinking in 18th century terms,
Frederick was by no means liberal.
He practiced political censorship and ruled by absolute decree. Still.
He was at the forefront of this new wave of rulers promoting culture and
tolerance. So let's start with tolerance.
Remember earlier how Frederick became a nonbeliever almost despite his father,
while that non-belief would turn his pressure into a bastion for free thinking.
Frederick hated superstition and felt the religion should be the subject to the
same questioning as other systems accordingly.
He allowed both Catholicism and Protestantism and his kingdom and encouraged
scientific debate of both faiths. This being the 18th century,
that tolerance didn't really extend towards pressures.
Jews who Frederick regarded with suspicion at best atheists though were another
matter.
Frederick prided himself on offering a safe Haven to heretics that went beyond
even what could be found in England beyond religion.
Frederick also offered shelter to some of the most freethinking minds of his
era, chief among them Aire.
One of Europe's greatest writers and philosophers Aire was the 18th century
equivalent of a superstar as early as the 1730s,
when he was still just a young prince Frederick had been exchanging letters with
the great thinker. Admittedly,
these letters had been full of the two of them sucking up to each other in the
most embarrassing of ways like Voltaire responding to a potential meeting by
writing I Soho to faint from joy,
still their correspondence reflects Frederick's genuine desire to be an
enlightened ruler as well as a man of international tastes.
Frederick got Volter to help him with his French,
even going so far as to descend him poems to edit not the Aire seems to have
thought much of Frederick's literary pros in 70 53 during a mul year stay at
Frederick's court.
Voltaire received a stack of the King's poems by SI and declaring will the king
never tire of giving me his dirty laundry to wash still.
There was more to Frederick the great than simply advocating a degree of
intellectual freedom under his watch.
The cities of Berlin and Potsdam were given makeovers,
transforming them into some of the most beautiful places in Europe.
Pod's San sea palace, meaning carefree and French is in particular,
an architectural masterpiece,
a palace where Frederick could indulge in his childhood passion for music
surrounded by handsome young men. In fact,
it proved to be such a congenial setting that Frederick effectively moved his
court there in 1748,
abandoning his father's Berlin for a place of his own away from architecture.
Frederick also supported culture in general,
including extra funding for the Berlin academy. However,
he was never quite the Bastian of Germanist later.
Fans would try to paint him as ber Frank of to his core Frederick was just as
likely to promote the latest writings from Paris as he was some groundbreaking
prion opera still for most of his subjects, the reign of Frederick,
the great was a good enough time.
The time when the civil service became more professional,
the judiciary more impartial and intellectual pursuits were considered just as
important as dawning a uniform and shooting a foreigner.
And yet Frederick would never quite shake off the military training.
His father had forced on him as much as he might like to think of himself.
As a philosopher king events were about to prove that Frederick was more of a
warlord than he cared to let on
By rights, the name world war I should belong,
not to the European conflicts that raged from 1914 to 1918,
but to a much earlier war kicking off in 1754 is so fighting,
not just in Europe, but in north and south America, west Africa,
and on the Indian subcontinent known as the seven years war or the French and
Indian war in America,
it was perhaps the biggest military conation the planet had yet seen.
And one of its principle drivers would be Frederick great to bit.
All the causes of the seven years war into context would take the rest of this
video.
But the shore version is that Britain and France were vying for power in the
colonies. While a diplomatic revolution was transforming Europe's alliances.
Russia for a example was becoming both increasingly anti-US and cozying up to
great Britain.
So when a colonial war kicked off between Paris and London in 1754,
Frederick hastily promised Britain neutrality.
Unfortunately he was meant to be allied to France.
And when Louie the 15th found out,
he was pretty by 1756,
Frederick was convinced that while was no longer a threat, France,
Russia and Austria were just weeks away from tag teaming him and snatching
back Silesia. So he decided to do what had done the last time and attack.
First in August of 1756,
Frederick fired the opening gun on the war in Europe by invading Austria's
allies Saxony in no time, it all had snatched,
Dresden and lip Zig and carried on into Bohemia to LA siege Prague.
And so began the second great war of Frederick's reign to say that it was a
roller coaster ride would be to severely underestimate just how wildly precious
fortunes rose and fell. Unlike pretty much all his enemies.
Frederick personally led his army assisted by generals like his brother,
prince Henry often this gave him a huge tactical advantage while other armies
were hamstrung by needing to check actions with their capitals.
Frederick could think on his feet making a policy at lightning speed.
He also had a ruthless cunning streak that served him well at the battle of LUN
in 1757,
Frederick ran rings around his Austrian opponents so much so that Napoleon would
later call him the greatest tactician in history.
But despite the hype Frederick was known Napoleon,
he was sly fast thinking and courageous. Sure, but he was also stubborn.
And that occasionally led him to the brink of disaster.
The 1759 bad of CO's doff almost ended Frederick's military career in the face
of a joint Austrian Russian force. Frederick pushed too hard,
lost the advantage and was forced to watch his army disintegrate into an
undisciplined mess of the 50,000 or so many had started with only 3000,
made it to the end of the battle.
It was such a defeat that Frederick considered suicide. A year later,
he suffered another blow when his enemies invaded and briefly occupied Berlin,
still these setbacks were rare enough that by 1761 pressure was heading towards
victory. Unfortunately, this was victory in the per sense,
the seven years war had left pressure broke.
Frederick was unable to pay his employees and it looked like there might be
rioting if peace wasn sign. Soon as usual though,
luck was on his side in May, 1762 SAR, Peter II came to the Russian throne,
a massive Frederick fanboy.
The new SAR ended some Petersburg's involvement in the war with a major ally
dropping out Maria therea, reluctantly thrown the towel in February 70 63.
The piece of Huber Berg ended pressure and Austria's two decades of waring of
for Silesia for good. While the, to pressure had been massive.
Frederick had made gains that went beyond mere finances.
Prusa was now undeniably a great power, able to swipe land away from Austria,
fight the Russians and forge game changing alliances with Britain.
Although Frederick would be careful to never again,
fight such a spectacular war. His international prestig went through the roof,
but he still wasn't done. Pressure was still too disunited too vulnerable,
too much of a hermaphrodite to be truly secure.
It would take one more major change for Frederick's legacy to be complete.
The final major act of Frederick.
The Great's life was also his most infamous since the 1760s,
the kingdom of Poland had been beset by internal problems that made it look
woefully weak for Poland's predatory neighbors.
That meant one thing only dinner time. The first one to say out loud,
what everyone had been thinking was Frederick in 1769.
He tried to get Catherine the great to auditioned Poland with him,
but the Russian Empress mu however she didn't mu for long,
because down in Austria,
Maria therea was starting to seriously think about expanding her own territory.
So Frederick convinced them both to join him in slicing up Poland.
The first partition of Poland was the start of a process that would soon wipe
the kingdom from the map taking place in 1772,
it saw Russia and Austria both take huge bites of territory.
The part Frederick took a much smaller chunk,
but one that was incredibly significant prior to the partition PR had been a
wildly discontinuous state with east Russia,
separated from Berlin by a Polish territory, known as Royal Prusa.
It was this piece of lands that Frederick now gobbled up transforming PRSA for
the first time into a unified state with clear defensible frontiers.
Although he failed to gain the great port city of Danza,
he did net control of the VI and thus the grain trade from then on
men's in Prussia would become much rarer.
And that was really it for F Fred's reign. Well not in a technic year old sense.
He lived for another 14 years during which he continued to support the arts,
build up the army,
modernize the state and do delightful things like introduce the potato to
Prussia. But as far as highlights go,
the sort that might be covers in a 23 minute video of Poland was the
last big one. Frederick the great died on August the 17th,
1786 at the age of 74,
while his passing didn't mark the ends of the age of enlightened despotism,
it came pretty close. Just three short years later,
the French revolution would launch the continent into a brand new EPO.
One in which Frederick seems not like some grand reformist.
But's rather a Relic of a bag on age yet.
This dramatic shift didn't mean that Frederick was forgotten.
As we've already mentioned,
one of the King's biggest fans was Napoleon Bonna apart who considered Frederick
a great general and the battle of Luther his masterpiece.
But even after the death of Leite,
corporal Frederick's influence remained across the next 160 years.
Many politicians tried to claim him as one of their own in the 19th century,
Bismark encouraged others to see him as Frederick's successor finishing the work
had begun in world war I German high command used his memory to inspire the
troops to keep on fighting during world war II.
Adolf Hitler even kept a portrait of Frederick in his bunker.
Perhaps hoping that some of the old Kings tactical genius might rub on him
today, likely because of the Hitler connection.
It's less fashionable to see Frederick as some kind of great German warrior.
Undoubtedly,
his occasional genius as a leader on the battlefield is still celebrated,
but now we're equally likely to be drawn to his peace time work here.
Art rule was a king who set the template for an enlightenment ruler,
a man who took a small military state and turned it into one of the great
centers of European culture.
It's easy to forget just how different things could have been,
how easily Frederick could have been like his father, a pumper soldier,
marching rounds with his chest puffed out like some diluted pigeon that he
wasn't speaks both to his era, but also to his character,
a character that him admire across the whole of Europe.
His name may have sometimes been misused by those who came after him,
but there's no denying that Frederick II really did deserve his title. Great.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to jacket off.
Fantastic sponsor Nord, VPN, who I am link do below. Thank you for watching.